Cookie Theft Mitigation Cheat Sheet (#1615)
OWASP/CheatSheetSeries: cheatsheets_draft/Cookie_Theft_Mitigation.md

# Cookie Theft Mitigation Cheat Sheet

## Introduction

With the spread of 2FA and Passkey, the login process has become more robust, and even if an attacker steals only the password, it has become difficult to do a spoofing attack.

> However, if attacker can steal a valid session cookie instead, it is possible to hijack the user session for the duration of the session lifetime period. In other words, stealing a session cookie has the same impact as stealing authentication credentials until it's expires. No matter how robust your authentication process is, it will not be a sufficient countermeasure for Cookie Theft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if attacker can steal a valid session cookie instead, it is possible to hijack the user session for the duration of the session lifetime period. In other words, stealing a session cookie has the same impact as stealing authentication credentials until it expires. No matter how robust your authentication process is, it will not be a sufficient countermeasure for Cookie Theft.
```

> Generally, cookie theft is carried out directly against users through malware or phishing attacks. Therefore, the only thing a service can do is "detect as quickly as possible when a stolen cookie is used".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, cookie theft is carried out directly against users through malware or phishing attacks. Therefore, the only thing a service can do is to _detect as quickly as possible when a stolen cookie is used_.
```

> ## Main Section

Reviewer: I think we should have a more descriptive header here.

> Session Cookies are given to users when they logged in. If these are stolen by an attacker and used to hijack session from attackers device, several of the environment informations used in the connection for session will change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Session Cookies are given to users when they log in. If these are stolen by an attacker and used to hijack the session from the attacker's device, certain environment information used in the connection for session will change.
```

> For example, if a stolen cookies are used by an attacker from another country, you can detect this by detecting a large change in the IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if stolen cookies are used by an attacker from another country, you can detect this by detecting a significant change in the IP address.
```

In this way, there are multiple vectors that can be used to detect that the user environments has changed.

- Access from different region (IP Address)
- Access from different device (User-Agent)
- Access from different language setting (Accept-Language)
- Access at different time of day (Date)

If you save this information when establishing a session and compare it in each request, you can detect if the user environment has changed.

> Of course, it is difficult to make a judgment based on simple comparison alone. For example, if the user changes the WiFi network they are connected to, their IP address will change. If the user updates browser, User-Agent will change. So it is necessary not only to compare the values, but also to check whether the meaning of the values has not changed significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, it is difficult to make a judgment based on simple comparison alone. For example, if the user changes the WiFi network they are connected to, their IP address will change. If the user updates their browser, User-Agent will change. So it is necessary not only to compare the values, but also to check whether the meaning of the values has not changed significantly.
```

> ### False negative/positive -ness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### False negatives/positives
```

Suppose that a session cookie that has been granted access in a certain country is used from another country. This could be an attack, or it could simply be that the user has traveled.

In other words, it is not possible to say with certainty that it is an attack just because the IP-Geo has changed. This means that there are **False Negatives** (it seems to be an attack, but it is not) in this detection method.

At the same time, even if the IP-Geo does not change, there is also the possibility that the attacker is attacking from within the same country. This means that this detection method has a **False positives** (it seems not to be an attack, but it is).

### Cookie Theft Detection

By storing session information on the server side when a session is established, it is possible to detect session hijacking when that information is significantly changed.

The following are the core information that should be saved.

- IP Address
- User-Agent
- Accept-Language
- Date

In addition, the following headers, which can be change depending on the Device and OS, are also effective as monitoring targets.

- Accept
- Accept-Encoding

> Also, recent browsers sends request headers called `Sec-Fetch-*` that provides information about the browsing contexts, so these values can also be used as a reference. It's not sent by the every browser, and it's not always sent even if browser supported. so it should be covered as Opt-In manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, recent browsers sends request headers called `Sec-Fetch-*` that provides information about the browsing contexts, so these values can also be used as a reference. It's not sent by every browser, and it's not always sent even if browser supported, so it should not be relied upon.
```

- sec-ch-prefers-color-scheme
- sec-ch-ua
- sec-ch-ua-arch
- sec-ch-ua-bitness
- sec-ch-ua-form-factors
- sec-ch-ua-full-version
- sec-ch-ua-full-version-list
- sec-ch-ua-mobile
- sec-ch-ua-model
- sec-ch-ua-platform
- sec-ch-ua-platform-version
- sec-ch-ua-wow64

When a session is established on the server, this information is collected and saved in association with the session like below.

```js
const session = SessionStorage.create()
session.save({
  ip: req.clientIP,
  user_agent: req.headers.userAgent,
  date: req.headers.date,
  accept_language: req.headers.acceptLanguage,
  // ...
})
```

> If a large change is detected when comparing these informations each time a request is received, it is possible that the session has been hijacked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a large change is detected when comparing this information each time a request is received, it is possible that the session has been hijacked.
```

### Session Validation

If there is a possibility that a session has been hijacked, the most reliable verification method is to re-authenticate. If you temporarily invalidate the user's session, ask them to authenticate again, and then give them a new session cookie, the attacker will no longer be able to do anything with the stolen cookie.

> However, as I mentioned earlier, monitoring sessions has the potential for false positives, so if you have to re-authenticate too often, it will be a bad experience for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as mentioned earlier, monitoring sessions has the potential for false positives, so if you have to re-authenticate too often, it will be a poor experience for the user.
```

An alternative would be to use a CAPTCHA or similar to make a decision. This is particularly useful when a stolen session cookie is being used by a bot or other malicious program.

> Basically, if there is a suspicion of session hijacking, it would be good to display a CAPTCHA for normal browsing, and to use re-authentication to provide reliable protection before accessing confidential information or performing processes with side effects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a compromise, if there is a suspicion of session hijacking, it could be good practice to display a CAPTCHA for normal browsing, and to use re-authentication to provide reliable protection before accessing confidential information or performing actions with side effects.
```

```js
function cookieTheftDetectionMiddleware(req, res) {
  const currentIP = req.clientIP
  const expectedIP = req.session.ip
  if (checkGeoIPRange(currentIP, expected) === false) {
     // Validation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
```

  const currentUA = req.userAgent
  const expectedUA = req.session.ua
  if (checkUserAgent(currentUA, expectedUA)) {
    // Validation
  }

  // ...
}

app.post("/users/delete", cookieTheftDetectionMiddleware, (req, res) => {
 // ...
})
```

> Usually, such functions are provided as middleware, or they are provided by WAF (Web Application Framework) installed in front of the server itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, such functions are provided as middleware, or they are provided by WAF (Web Application Firewall) installed in front of the web server.
```
